CONTRIBUTING.adoc, before:

= Contributing to BeanBand
:toc:

Thank you for considering contributing to the *BeanBand* project and welcome to
The Band!  This file introduces you to the basic cornerstones of our project
and how and where we are currently looking for contributions.

== Priorities

In order to bundle our efforts efficiently, the maintainer has defined the top
priorities for the near future:

* *High musical quality of the generated playbacks*
* A stable and extensible architecture
* Well-defined internal data models

So in addition to the core library modules responsible for the playback
generation, we will currently only provide rudimentary input and output options
as a proof of concept, and focus all effort on the music generation logic at
the heart of *BeanBand*.

That being said, the long-term goals will eventually include

* Additional rendering mechanisms of the playbacks such as audio files or live
  playback
* Improved sound quality of the generated playbacks
* A graphical user interface for editing song information and rendering playback
* A more sophisticated file format for song information

But all of these features will have to wait until the musical quality is
considered to be high enough.

== Target Audience

As mentioned, the maintainer has a very clear vision of the top priorities of
the project. This means that while, of course, all suggestions and improvements
are welcome, and everything will be considered and discussed, there should be no
effort put into other topics as long as the quality standards of the main goals
are not met. So before you decide to put effort into contributing, please
consider carefully if this is a project meeting you expectations.

If you are a clean-code enthusiast with little to no interest in music, but a
strong affinity for modern architectures, solid design patterns and beautiful
code, we would definitely value your input, but there might actually be other
projects where you would have more fun.

If you are a very experienced and skilled software developer with a strong
interest in music, you might learn a lot in this project, and your skills would
definitely be an asset in supporting colleagues with less programming skills.

If you are a very experienced musician, ideally with a strong background in
music (especially jazz) theory, as well as a strong interest in programming, then we
need you! Please consider supporting us with your musicological knowledge.
Don’t worry that your programming skills might not be sufficient, you will get
any support possible when it comes to software engineering topics.

== Design Decisions

Based on the priorities the maintainer has made some basic design decisions.
This is to make sure there are no distractions from the main goals. Note,
however, that these decisions hold for the initial project phases, and might
well be reconsidered once we expand the scope of our efforts.

Simple input/output architecture::
  The first implementations will read the user-provided contents from a simple,
  lightweight text file, and write the output to a standard MIDI file. More
  sophisticated input/output options will be deferred to later project stages.
No external dependencies::
  At least the core modules should have no dependencies on external libraries
  or resources, and be implemented in pure Java.
Extension mechanisms using +ServiceLoader+::
  The main points of extension, and also the primary focus of the development
  efforts, are new +Arranger+ and new +Band+ implementations. Adding them
  should be as lightweight as possible. We will use the +ServiceLoader+ class,
  which is provided by Java natively.
No extensibility for other components::
  The core of the current project is the music generation library, so instead of
  providing mechanisms to attach other than the basic +Parser+ and +Renderer+
  implementations from the proof of concept, the strategy is to embed the core
  library in more sophisticated and user-friendly solutions later on. Also, all
  of the internal data models as well as the +Bandleader+ and the +Engineer+
  will be maintained centrally, and will not provide any extension mechanisms.
Documentation using javadoc::
  As an additional step to reduce external dependencies, all technical documentation will
  be contained in the +javadoc+.
Testing strategy::
  The current testing strategy revolves around a set of carefully created and
  well-documented sample songs to be rendered by *BeanBand* as a form of
  integration test. Unfortunately both the generated MIDI files as well as the
  logged annotations will need to be verified using human ears and eyes
  respectively. 
Namespace::
  The namespace will be +org.beanband+.
Logging::
  We will use +java.util.logging+ throughout, and use one named +Logger+
  throughout the library.
General MIDI standard::
  Currently we will use MIDI sequences as output format, and adhere to the
  https://www.midi.org/specifications-old/category/gm-specifications[General
  MIDI Specifications]. Although this limits the possibilities of the generated
  playbacks, it provides enough capabilities to focus on the quality of the
  underlying generation logic.

== Obtaining and Running BeanBand

Since we have no dependencies on any external libraries ao far, except a JDK
of version 8 or higher, getting the source code is as simple as cloning the Git
repository. *BeanBand* sticks to the Maven Standard Directory Layout, so you
should be able to import it into the IDE of your choice.

Currently the *BeanBand* core package only comes with a simple command-line
interface that creates playbacks as MIDI files from lightweight text files
containing the song definition. The main class is +BeanBand+, please refer to
the API documentation in the +javadoc+ on how to use it.

== Starting your work

Before you start contributing to *BeanBand* you should get familiar with the
basic architecture of the system. Please refer to the Technical Documentation
contained in the +javadoc+ for details.

Once you are familiar with the system, you should decide on where you want to
put your focus. We have currently two major focus areas for improvements:

Enhance the musical quality::
  In short, we want better and more intelligent bands. Technically this means
  that we are looking for new as well as improvements and enhancements to
  existing +Arranger+ and +Band+ implementations.
Test song portfolio::
  In order to test the contributions to *BeanBand* we need a good portfolio of
  high-quality and well-documented Song Files. Please note that we are not
  looking for a collection that is as large or comprehensive as possible, but
  for a select set of songs that together test the limits of the system’s
  possibilities. Also, since the tests need to be verified manually, the song
  files should be well documented to define the expected result.

As mentioned previously, both focus areas are not so much software engineering
challenges, but need a very high degree of musicological knowledge put into
them. For further information and the current backlog please refer to the
link:TODO.adoc[TODO] file.

Commit message:

Refactored javadoc and TODO tags. (#6)
* Refactored javadoc and TODO tags.

CONTRIBUTING.adoc, after:

= Contributing to BeanBand
:toc:

Thank you for considering contributing to the *BeanBand* project and welcome to
The Band!  This file introduces you to the basic cornerstones of our project
and how and where we are currently looking for contributions.

== Priorities

In order to bundle our efforts efficiently, the maintainer has defined the top
priorities for the near future:

* *High musical quality of the generated playbacks*
* A stable and extensible architecture
* Well-defined internal data models

So in addition to the core library modules responsible for the playback
generation, we will currently only provide rudimentary input and output options
as a proof of concept, and focus all effort on the music generation logic at
the heart of *BeanBand*.

That being said, the long-term goals will eventually include

* Additional rendering mechanisms of the playbacks such as audio files or live
  playback
* Improved sound quality of the generated playbacks
* A graphical user interface for editing song information and rendering playback
* A more sophisticated file format for song information

But all of these features will have to wait until the musical quality is
considered to be high enough.

== Target Audience

As mentioned, the maintainer has a very clear vision of the top priorities of
the project. This means that while, of course, all suggestions and improvements
are welcome, and everything will be considered and discussed, there should be no
effort put into other topics as long as the quality standards of the main goals
are not met. So before you decide to put effort into contributing, please
consider carefully if this is a project meeting you expectations.

If you are a clean-code enthusiast with little to no interest in music, but a
strong affinity for modern architectures, solid design patterns and beautiful
code, we would definitely value your input, but there might actually be other
projects where you would have more fun.

If you are a very experienced and skilled software developer with a strong
interest in music, you might learn a lot in this project, and your skills would
definitely be an asset in supporting colleagues with less programming skills.

If you are a very experienced musician, ideally with a strong background in
music (especially jazz) theory, as well as a strong interest in programming, then we
need you! Please consider supporting us with your musicological knowledge.
Don’t worry that your programming skills might not be sufficient, you will get
any support possible when it comes to software engineering topics.

== Design Decisions

Based on the priorities the maintainer has made some basic design decisions.
This is to make sure there are no distractions from the main goals. Note,
however, that these decisions hold for the initial project phases, and might
well be reconsidered once we expand the scope of our efforts.

Simple input/output architecture::
  The first implementations will read the user-provided contents from a simple,
  lightweight text file, and write the output to a standard MIDI file. More
  sophisticated input/output options will be deferred to later project stages.
No external dependencies::
  At least the core modules should have no dependencies on external libraries
  or resources, and be implemented in pure Java.
Extension mechanisms using +ServiceLoader+::
  The main points of extension, and also the primary focus of the development
  efforts, are new +Arranger+ and new +Band+ implementations. Adding them
  should be as lightweight as possible. We will use the +ServiceLoader+ class,
  which is provided by Java natively.
No extensibility for other components::
  The core of the current project is the music generation library, so instead of
  providing mechanisms to attach other than the basic +Parser+ and +Renderer+
  implementations from the proof of concept, the strategy is to embed the core
  library in more sophisticated and user-friendly solutions later on. Also, all
  of the internal data models as well as the +Bandleader+ and the +Engineer+
  will be maintained centrally, and will not provide any extension mechanisms.
Documentation using javadoc::
  As an additional step to reduce external dependencies, all technical documentation will
  be contained in the +javadoc+.
Testing strategy::
  The current testing strategy revolves around a set of carefully created and
  well-documented sample songs to be rendered by *BeanBand* as a form of
  integration test. Unfortunately both the generated MIDI files as well as the
  logged annotations will need to be verified using human ears and eyes
  respectively. 
Namespace::
  The namespace will be +org.beanband+.
Logging::
  We will use +java.util.logging+ throughout, and use one named +Logger+
  throughout the library.
General MIDI standard::
  Currently we will use MIDI sequences as output format, and adhere to the
  https://www.midi.org/specifications-old/category/gm-specifications[General
  MIDI Specifications]. Although this limits the possibilities of the generated
  playbacks, it provides enough capabilities to focus on the quality of the
  underlying generation logic.

== Obtaining and Running BeanBand

Since we have no dependencies on any external libraries ao far, except a JDK
of version 8 or higher, getting the source code is as simple as cloning the Git
repository. *BeanBand* sticks to the Maven Standard Directory Layout, so you
should be able to import it into the IDE of your choice.

Currently the *BeanBand* core package only comes with a simple command-line
interface that creates playbacks as MIDI files from lightweight text files
containing the song definition. The main class is +BeanBand+, please refer to
the API documentation in the +javadoc+ on how to use it.

== Starting your work

Before you start contributing to *BeanBand* you should get familiar with the
basic architecture of the system. Please refer to the Technical Documentation
contained in the +javadoc+ for details.

Once you are familiar with the system, you should decide on where you want to
put your focus. We have currently two major focus areas for improvements:

Enhance the musical quality::
  In short, we want better and more intelligent bands. Technically this means
  that we are looking for new as well as improvements and enhancements to
  existing +Arranger+ and +Band+ implementations.
Test song portfolio::
  In order to test the contributions to *BeanBand* we need a good portfolio of
  high-quality and well-documented Song Files. Please note that we are not
  looking for a collection that is as large or comprehensive as possible, but
  for a select set of songs that together test the limits of the system’s
  possibilities. Also, since the tests need to be verified manually, the song
  files should be well documented to define the expected result.

As mentioned previously, both focus areas are not so much software engineering
challenges, but need a very high degree of musicological knowledge put into
them. For further information and the current backlog please refer to the
+TODO+ and +FIXME+ tags scattered through the sourcecode.

Also please keep the code free of any warnings and in general as clean as
possible.
